Add new guide about Jupyter in Sphinx (#8283)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/guides/jupyter.rst

How to use Jupyter notebooks in Sphinx
======================================

> By default, `Sphinx only supports reStructuredText source files for
> documentation <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-source_suffix>`_.
> Luckily, there are a few extensions to also allow Jupyter notebooks as source files.
> 

Reviewer: This feels like a pretty abrupt introduction. We should cover a bit more about what this tutorial is about and why we're writing it. 

```suggestion
Jupyter notebooks are a common format to represent calculations that have been done on a set of data.
Embedding them in your Sphinx documentation allows an integration between data calculations and documentation,
which can provide a great experience for examples and other pages in your documentation. 
There are a few extensions that allow integrating these two tools,
and this document will explain how to achieve some of the most commonly requested features. 

```

Author: Good point. I took parts of this and rewrote them slightly.

.. _ipynb-notebooks-sphinx:

Including ``.ipynb`` notebooks in Sphinx documentation
------------------------------------------------------

There are two main extensions that add support for ``.ipynb`` as source files in Sphinx:
nbsphinx_ and MyST-NB_. Even though they have some differences,

> their basic mode of operation is very similar. However, they are mutually exclusive,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their basic mode of operation is very similar. They can't both be used,
```

Author: Reworked this section.

> so you have to choose one of them.

Reviewer: This feels scary. Are we going to tell users which one to use?! How do they work? 

We just go right into step-by-step content after this introduction, which feels weird.

Author: It _is_ scary 😄 now seriously, I was trying to avoid getting into too much technical detail, but you're right we should distill that information in a less intimidating way. Rewriting.

configuration yourself.

Finally, you can include the notebook in any *toctree*.
For example, add this to your root document:

.. code-block:: rest

   .. toctree::
      :maxdepth: 2
      :caption: Contents:

      notebooks/Example 1

The notebook will render as any other HTML page in your documentation
after doing ``make html``.

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/example-notebook-rendered.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

   Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

To further customize the rendering process among other things,
refer to the nbsphinx_ or MyST-NB_ documentation.

.. note::

   The visual appearance of code cells and their outputs
   is slightly different in nbsphinx and MyST-NB:
   the former renders the cell numbers by default,
   whereas the latter doesn't.

Rendering interactive widgets
-----------------------------

You can also embed interactive widgets from Jupyter notebooks created using ipywidgets_
on HTML Sphinx documentation. This includes basic widgets from ipywidgets_ and also
more complex ones,

> like `ipyleaflet`_ visualizations.

Reviewer: Why would I want to do this? Without having a lot of context about Jupyter, I can't really parse the goal of interactive widgets -- we should explain them.

Author: Good point, will add a bit more background at the beginning.

  You need to click it before exporting your notebook to HTML.
- JupyterLab provides a "Save Widget State Automatically" option in the "Settings" menu.
  You need to leave it checked so that widget state is automatically saved.
- In Visual Studio Code `it's not possible to save the widget
  state <https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-jupyter/issues/4404>`_
  at the time of writing.

.. _ipywidgets: https://ipywidgets.readthedocs.io/

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/jupyterlab-save-widget-state.png
   :width: 30%
   :align: center
   :alt: JupyterLab option to save the interactive widget state automatically

   JupyterLab option to save the interactive widget state automatically

For example, if you create a notebook with a simple
`IntSlider <https://ipywidgets.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/Widget%20List.html#IntSlider>`_
widget from ipywidgets and save the widget state,
the slider will render correctly in Sphinx.

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/widget-html.gif
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Interactive widget rendered in HTML by Sphinx

   Interactive widget rendered in HTML by Sphinx

> To see more elaborate examples:

Reviewer: This is really good 👍

- `ipyleaflet`_ provides several widgets for interactive maps,
  and renders live versions of them `in their
  documentation <https://ipyleaflet.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/velocity.html>`_.
- `PyVista <https://docs.pyvista.org/>`_ is used for scientific 3D visualization
  with several interactive backends and `examples in their
  documentation <https://docs.pyvista.org/index.html#maps-and-geoscience>`_ as well.

.. warning::

   Although widgets themselves can be embedded in HTML as shown above,
   `events <https://ipywidgets.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/Widget%20Events.html>`_
   require a backend (kernel) to execute.
   Therefore, ``@interact``, ``.observe``, and related functionalities relying on them

>    will not work as expected.

Reviewer: Great warning.

Creating galleries of examples using notebooks
----------------------------------------------

If you want to create an HTML gallery of examples for your project,
`Sphinx-Gallery <https://sphinx-gallery.github.io/>`_
offers a very convenient way of doing so from Sphinx,
including thumbnail generation.
However, `it works with Python scripts rather than
notebooks <https://github.com/sphinx-gallery/sphinx-gallery/issues/245>`_,

> which might not be what you want.

Reviewer: This seems like an odd guide to place this content. Should we have another guide on examples?

Author: Not necessarily, Sphinx-Gallery workflow can be weird for people used to working with notebooks. I rewrote this paragraph.

> which might not be what you want.

Reviewer: I got confused: "why is this guide telling me about things that don't work in notebooks?" It feels weird to include above `nbsphinx`, since it's talking about something that doesn't work. We should re-order this, and frame it as a way of integrating sphinx & sphinx-gallery instead of saying it doesn't work with notebooks.

Author: Good point, I rewrote this paragraph and now I think it's more clear.

`nbsphinx`_ has support for `creating thumbnail galleries from a list of Jupyter
notebooks <https://nbsphinx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/subdir/gallery.html>`_,
and it is compatible with Sphinx-Gallery styles.
To use it, you will need to install both nbsphinx and Sphinx-Gallery,
and modify your ``conf.py`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: conf.py

   extensions = [
      'nbsphinx',
      'sphinx_gallery.load_style',
   ]

After doing that, there are two ways to create the gallery:

- From a reStructuredText source file, using the ``.. nbgallery::`` directive,
  `as showcased in the

>   documentation <https://nbsphinx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/a-normal-rst-file.html#thumbnail-galleries>`_.

Reviewer: Should we use intersphinx here?

Author: If only I had something like https://webknjaz.github.io/intersphinx-untangled/ to quickly inspect the inventory of a project, to see if this would make sense or not...!

I don't see any labels defined in https://github.com/spatialaudio/nbsphinx/blame/master/doc/a-normal-rst-file.rst, so I suppose we can't? But I might be missing some information here. cc @humitos

Reviewer: @astrojuanlu isn't that just a web-based version of the tool built into intersphinx? https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/intersphinx.html#showing-all-links-of-an-intersphinx-mapping-file

Reviewer: ```
	/a-normal-rst-file.rst#thumbnail-galleries Thumbnail Galleries                     : a-normal-rst-file.html#thumbnail-galleries
```

Author: TIL about `python -msphinx.ext.intersphinx` 👀 looking into this

Author: Right, I had a misconception about how `:ref:` worked that had nothing to do with the inventory. Basically I didn't know I could do this:

```
:ref:`as showcased in the documentation <nbsphinx:/a-normal-rst-file.rst#thumbnail-galleries>`
```

Reviewing the whole guide now. Thanks @ericholscher !

Author: Done. I converted some of the references to intersphinx, with these criteria:

- All the "core" references, except for a couple of Sphinx references I didn't know how to link.
- Examples for "social proof" (poliastro, ipyleaflet) _not_ converted, to avoid overloading the intersphinx mapping (not sure if I should worry about this?)

- From a Jupyter notebook, adding a ``"nbsphinx-gallery"`` tag to the metadata of a cell.

>   Each editor has a different way of modifying the cell metadata (see figure below).

Reviewer: Do we want to recommend this approach? Seems like the RST way of doing it is way more obvious and nicer -- and doesn't require us talking about editors.

Author: Yes! In fact, it's done in the next paragraph. Perhaps I can rephrase this to clarify that?

Author: Given that we are doing that, resolving this comment

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/jupyterlab-metadata.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Panel to modify cell metadata in JupyterLab

   Panel to modify cell metadata in JupyterLab

For example, this reST markup would create a thumbnail gallery
with generic images as thumbnails,
thanks to the Sphinx-Gallery default style:

.. code-block:: rest

   Thumbnails gallery
   ==================

   .. nbgallery::
      notebooks/Example 1
      notebooks/Example 2

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/thumbnail-gallery.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Simple thumbnail gallery created using nbsphinx

   Simple thumbnail gallery created using nbsphinx

Using notebooks in other formats
--------------------------------

Jupyter notebooks in ``.ipynb`` format
(as described in the `nbformat
documentation <https://nbformat.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_)
are by far the most widely used for historical reasons.

However, to compensate some of the disadvantages of the ``.ipynb`` format

> (like cumbersome integration with version control systems),

Reviewer: This is a good `why` section. It explains to me why I would want my notebooks in other formats. Is this something that we recommend? Should we?

Author: I will add some more technical background on the tradeoffs.

`jupytext`_ offers `other formats <https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/formats.html>`_
based on plain text rather than JSON.

One of such formats is the `MyST Markdown
format <https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/formats.html#myst-markdown>`_,
which is based on `MyST`_, an extensible flavor of Markdown
that includes some features from reStructuredText.

> If you are interested in using alternative formats for Jupyter notebooks,
> nowadays there are two main ways to include them
> in your Sphinx documentation:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using alternative formats for Jupyter notebooks,
there are two main ways to include them
in your Sphinx documentation:
```

Author: Committed locally verbatim 👍🏽

How to use Jupyter notebooks in Sphinx
======================================

> `Jupyter`_ notebooks are a popular tool to describe computational narratives

Reviewer 2: meta point (feel free to disregard) - I am a big fan of [sembr](https://sembr.org/) for deciding when to do line breaks, rather than basing it on character length. If it's too much hassle to think about the "right" place to break lines, I've found that using "one sentence per line" is a nice rubric.

Author: Yeah, even if it doesn't look like it, I'm a fan too! However I still haven't mastered the technique, or often put two sentences in one line. Thanks for the reminder though :)

Embedding them in your Sphinx project allows using these rich documents as documentation,
which can provide a great experience for tutorials, examples, and other types of technical content.
There are a few extensions that allow integrating Jupyter and Sphinx,
and this document will explain how to achieve some of the most commonly requested features.

.. _Jupyter: https://jupyter.org/

By default, `Sphinx only supports reStructuredText source files for
documentation <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-source_suffix>`_.
Luckily, there are a few extensions to also allow Jupyter notebooks as source files.

.. _nb-background:

Background on the existing relevant extensions
----------------------------------------------

There are two main extensions that add support Jupyter notebooks as source files in Sphinx:
nbsphinx_ and MyST-NB_. They have similar intent and basic functionality:
both can read notebooks in ``.ipynb`` and additional formats supported by `jupytext`_,
and are configured in a similar way.
However, there are some differences between them:

- nsphinx uses `pandoc <https://pandoc.org/>`_ to convert the Markdown from Jupyter notebooks

>   to reStructuredText and then to docutils AST,

Author: Good catch, thanks! Will add a link to https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/doctree.html

  whereas MyST-NB uses `MyST-Parser`_ to directly convert the Markdown text to docutils AST.

>   Both Markdown flavors are mostly equal, but they have some differences.

Reviewer 2: Rather than focusing on the "parser", I'd probably focus on the "flavor" of markdown that each supports. Most users don't really know what a "parser" is anyway, and rather they care more about "what syntax can I write?". I'd re-focus around "CommonMark/Jupyter markdown" with nbsphinx and MyST Markdown with MyST-NB.

Author: I think talking about "which parser" might be interesting technical information difficult to find elsewhere, but you're right that I should more explicitly differentiate what this actually means in practical terms. I will rework this part.

- nbsphinx executes each notebook during the parsing phase,
  whereas MyST-NB can execute all notebooks up front
  and cache them with `jupyter-cache <https://jupyter-cache.readthedocs.io/>`_.

>   This can result in shorter build times when when notebooks are slightly modified

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This can result in shorter build times when when notebooks are modified
```

  if using MyST-NB.
- nbsphinx provides functionality to create thumbnail galleries,
  whereas MyST-NB does not have such functionality at the moment
  (see :ref:`below <notebook-galleries>` for more information about galleries).
- MyST-NB allows embedding Python objects coming from the notebook in the documentation
  (read :ref:`their "glue" documentation <myst-nb:glue>`
  for more information)
  and provides more sophisticated :ref:`error reporting <myst-nb:start/error-reporting>`
  than the one nbsphinx has.
- The visual appearance of code cells and their outputs is slightly different:
  nbsphinx renders the cell numbers by default,
  whereas MyST-NB doesn't.

.. _nbsphinx: https://nbsphinx.readthedocs.io/
.. _MyST-NB: https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/
.. _MyST-Parser: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/
.. _jupytext: https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/

Using which one to use depends on your use case. As general recommendations:

> - If you want to use :ref:`other notebook formats <other-formats>`

Reviewer 2: I'm leaning towards just not telling people what they "should" do - it feels like that might become semi-arbitrary and opens up the tutorial to debate between the two projects. It seems cleaner to just focus on the "feature matrix" and UI/UX of each tool, rather than to give opinionated recommendations. Does that make sense?

Author: I agree that doing specific recommendations might be contentious. However, the two projects are very similar, and I (as a user) was very confused about the differences between them, so if we don't offer at least a small amount of guidance, I think we might leave our users confused or looking for answers. I was very careful here to weigh the pros and cons, and @chrisjsewell corrected me in several places where I was wrong about MyST-NB. What do you think @ericholscher ?

Reviewer: I guess I still don't understand the differences, or why they both exist. If there is a short explanation of when one would be better, we should include that. If there are basically just 2 libraries that do the same thing, we should mention that, and clarify when it's better to use one. I don't know if we can do much more than that.

Author: That's already done in the document (there's a background section explaining the technical differences between the two). About the "why", I don't think this is the place to clarify that -- the interested readers could head over https://github.com/spatialaudio/nbsphinx/issues/420 for some historical discussion :) But the two projects have evolved since then.

  or :ref:`generate a thumbnail gallery from your notebooks <notebook-galleries>`,
  nbsphinx is the right choice.
- If you want to leverage a more optimized execution workflow
  and a more streamlined parsing mechanism,
  as well as some of the unique MyST-NB functionalities
  (``glue``, better error reporting)
  you should use MyST-NB.

> For the rest of this document we will focus on `nbsphinx`_,

Reviewer 2: Just an observation - I think that there are only 2-3 places below where there is tool-specific syntax. And the difference between the two is minimal. What if you included some tabs that let people switch between `nbsphinx` and `myst-nb` configuration?

Author: Good idea! I see we are already using `sphinx_tabs` 👍🏽

Basic widgets using `ipywidgets`_ include controls like sliders, textboxes, and buttons,
and more complex widgets include interactive maps, like the ones provided by `ipyleaflet`_.

.. _ipywidgets: https://ipywidgets.readthedocs.io/
.. _ipyleaflet: https://ipyleaflet.readthedocs.io/

You can embed these interactive widgets on HTML Sphinx documentation.
For this to work, it's necessary to *save the widget state*
before generating the HTML documentation,
otherwise the widget will appear as empty.
Each editor has a different way of doing it:

- The classical Jupyter Notebook interface
  provides a "Save Notebook Widget State" action in the "Widgets" menu,
  :ref:`as explained in the ipywidgets
  documentation <ipywidgets:/embedding.md#embedding-widgets-in-html-web-pages>`.
  You need to click it before exporting your notebook to HTML.
- JupyterLab provides a "Save Widget State Automatically" option in the "Settings" menu.
  You need to leave it checked so that widget state is automatically saved.
- In Visual Studio Code `it's not possible to save the widget
  state <https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-jupyter/issues/4404>`_

>   at the time of writing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  at the time of writing (June 2021).
```

For example, if you create a notebook with a simple
:ref:`ipywidgets:/examples/widget list.ipynb#intslider`
widget from ipywidgets and save the widget state,
the slider will render correctly in Sphinx.

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/widget-html.gif
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Interactive widget rendered in HTML by Sphinx

   Interactive widget rendered in HTML by Sphinx

To see more elaborate examples:

- `ipyleaflet`_ provides several widgets for interactive maps,
  and renders live versions of them `in their
  documentation <https://ipyleaflet.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/velocity.html>`_.
- `PyVista <https://docs.pyvista.org/>`_ is used for scientific 3D visualization
  with several interactive backends and `examples in their
  documentation <https://docs.pyvista.org/index.html#maps-and-geoscience>`_ as well.

.. warning::

   Although widgets themselves can be embedded in HTML as shown above,
   :doc:`events <ipywidgets:examples/Widget Events>`
   require a backend (kernel) to execute.
   Therefore, ``@interact``, ``.observe``, and related functionalities relying on them
   will not work as expected.

> .. _notebook-galleries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. warning::

   Some interactive cell outputs expect certain **javascript dependencies** to be loaded in order to correctly display the output (e.g., [`plotly.js`](https://github.com/plotly/plotly.js/) for Plotly outputs).
   In Jupyter interfaces, these libraries are usually loaded via extensions, but building your documentation with notebooks requires you to lead the libraries yourself.

.. _notebook-galleries:
```

Reviewer 2: I'd also cross-link to some documentation about how people can load their own JS libraries.

Author: I'm not sure if it's worth adding this warning. I tried creating a project from scratch with `ipywidgets` and it worked without adding anything, and on the other hand Plotly has some rendering modes that either bundle or load using `require.js` the necessary code https://plotly.com/python/renderers/. But of course there might be other cases where some action is actually needed?

Author: Maybe

```
.. note::

   If your widgets need some additional JavaScript libraries,
   you can add them using ``Sphinx.add_js_file``
```

?

Reviewer 2: hmm - that sounds like a reasonable first step, though you might get users who are confused because their JS works in JupyterLab but not in the Sphinx HTML (Jupyter Book has a ton of issues opened around this)

Author: Done!

> Creating galleries of examples using notebooks

Reviewer 2: to be honest this one feels a little bit out-of-place given the tutorial's topic. I feel like "generate a gallery from multiple pages" is a generic use-case that is not notebook-specific (though it is a cool feature of nbsphinx). I almost feel like it deserves its own section (that covers `sphinx-gallery` primarily, and links to `nbsphinx` to talk about notebook-specific functionality) rather than to talk about galleries in the context of notebooks.

Author: I'm not sure. While "generating galleries from notebooks" is something that several projects are doing or seeking to do, "generating galleries from multiple pages" sounds like too abstract of a use case to have a guide dedicated to it.

For me as a user, creating galleries is 40 % of the reason why notebooks are cool, since thumbnails can be automatically generated and notebooks are an excellent choice for creating how-to guides. About sphinx-gallery, I tried using it in a personal project that was using notebooks for examples already https://github.com/poliastro/poliastro/pull/828 but the workflow ended up being more complex, so we abandoned this approach.

Reviewer 2: I'll leave this one to you - I think it comes down to whether "creating a gallery of notebooks" is a "core part of the notebook experience". In my opinion, it isn't, but I don't feel strongly about it, so if others believe strongly that it _is_, then I'll defer

Reviewer: I had the same feedback -- I think we probably want a different guide on galleries, and to link from that from this page. https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/pull/8283#discussion_r658350299

Author: Fair enough, perhaps I was being too stubborn - I agree to make another guide about example galleries. However, given that I would need to learn sphinx-gallery and investigate if there are other alternatives, do you folks think we can do it in another pull request? That way we can get this closer to being published.

- Replace ``.ipynb`` notebooks with :doc:`a text-based format <jupytext:formats>`.
  These formats behave better under version control
  and they can also be edited with normal text editors
  that do not support cell-based JSON notebooks.
  However, text-based formats do not store the outputs of the cells,
  and this might not be what you want.
- Pairing ``.ipynb`` notebooks with a text-based format,
  and putting the text-based file in version control,
  as suggested in the :doc:`jupytext documentation <jupytext:paired-notebooks>`.
  This solution has the best of both worlds.
  In some rare cases you might experience synchronization issues between both files.

These approaches are not mutually exclusive,
nor you have to use a single format for all your notebooks.
For the examples in this document, we will use the :ref:`MyST Markdown
format <jupytext:formats.md#myst-markdown>`.

If you are using alternative formats for Jupyter notebooks,
you can include them in your Sphinx documentation
using either `nbsphinx`_ or `MyST-NB`_
(:ref:`see above <nb-background>`
for more information about the differences between them).

.. _other-formats:

> Using notebooks in other formats

Reviewer 2: I'd probably move this higher up because it's the information most users will be interested in, and move the "background explanation" stuff about notebook formats beneath it with a cross-link.

Author: Good point, I will move the "background" to the end of the document (and change "above" by "below" etc)

and this document will explain how to achieve some of the most commonly requested features.

.. _Jupyter: https://jupyter.org/

By default, `Sphinx only supports reStructuredText source files for
documentation <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-source_suffix>`_.
Luckily, there are a few extensions to also allow Jupyter notebooks as source files.

.. _nb-background:

Background on the existing relevant extensions
----------------------------------------------

There are two main extensions that add support Jupyter notebooks as source files in Sphinx:
nbsphinx_ and MyST-NB_. Although they have similar intent and basic functionality,
there are some differences:

- nsphinx uses `pandoc <https://pandoc.org/>`_ to convert the Markdown from Jupyter notebooks
  to reStructuredText and then to docutils AST,
  whereas MyST-NB uses `MyST-Parser`_ to directly convert the Markdown text to docutils AST.
  Both Markdown flavors are mostly equal, but they have some differences.
- Both nbsphinx and MyST-NB support canonical ``.ipynb`` notebooks.
  nbsphinx can process any format supported by `jupytext`_,

>   whereas MyST-NB focuses on MyST Markdown Notebooks

Reviewer 3: myst-nb can also support any format: https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/custom-formats.html

Author: Thanks for the clarification! That was a misunderstanding on my side, will fix this (applies to your other comments below)

  (see :ref:`below <other-formats>` for more information about other notebook formats).
- nbsphinx executes each notebook during the parsing phase,
  whereas MyST-NB can execute all notebooks up front
  and cache them with `jupyter-cache <https://jupyter-cache.readthedocs.io/>`_.
  This can result in shorter build times when when notebooks are slightly modified
  if using MyST-NB.
- nbsphinx provides functionality to create thumbnail galleries,
  whereas MyST-NB does not have such functionality at the moment
  (see :ref:`below <notebook-galleries>` for more information about galleries).
- The visual appearance of code cells and their outputs is slightly different:
  nbsphinx renders the cell numbers by default,
  whereas MyST-NB doesn't.

.. _nbsphinx: https://nbsphinx.readthedocs.io/
.. _MyST-NB: https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/
.. _MyST-Parser: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/
.. _jupytext: https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/

Using which one to use depends on your use case. As general recommendations:

> - If you want to use :ref:`other notebook formats <other-formats>`

Reviewer 3: And yeh here again that’s not a
differentiator

  or :ref:`generate a thumbnail gallery from your notebooks <notebook-galleries>`,
  nbsphinx is the right choice.
- If you will be focusing on MyST Markdown notebooks
  or want to leverage a more optimized execution workflow
  and a more streamlined parsing mechanism,
  you should use MyST-NB.

For the rest of this document we will focus on `nbsphinx`_

> because it is more flexible and offers some extra functionality,

Reviewer 3: I would politely disagree 😜 again myst-nb supports all formats, and there is also things like glue: https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/en/latest/use/glue.html.  Obviously I’m biased though lol

Author: I am obviously biased too, since I've been using nbsphinx for 4 years and I know it much better than MyST-NB :) I will keep the examples with nbsphinx but try to make it look more neutral.

Plus: I didn't know about glue!

are by far the most widely used for historical reasons.

However, to compensate some of the disadvantages of the ``.ipynb`` format
(like cumbersome integration with version control systems),
`jupytext`_ offers `other formats <https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/formats.html>`_
based on plain text rather than JSON.

As a result, there are three modes of operation:

- Using classic ``.ipynb`` notebooks. It's the most straightforward option,
  since all the tooling is prepared to work with them,
  and does not require additional pieces of software.
  It is therefore simpler to manage, since there are fewer moving parts.
  However, it requires some care when working with Version Control Systems (like git),
  by doing one of these things:

  - Clear outputs before commit.
    Minimizes conflicts, but might defeat the purpose of notebooks themselves,
    since the computation results are not stored.
  - Use tools like `nbdime <https://nbdime.readthedocs.io/>`_ (open source)
    or `ReviewNB <https://www.reviewnb.com/>`_ (proprietary)
    to improve the review process.
  - Use a different collaboration workflow that doesn't involve notebooks.

> - Replace ``.ipynb`` notebooks with `a text-based

Reviewer 3: One think that maybe be worth noting here, is that if you use markdown files in myst-nb, error/warning messages will point to the correct line in the source file: https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/en/latest/use/start.html#sphinx-error-reporting

Author: Thanks!

  documentation <https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/paired-notebooks.html>`_.
  This solution has the best of both worlds.
  In some rare cases you might experience synchronization issues between both files.

These approaches are not mutually exclusive,
nor you have to use a single format for all your notebooks.
For the examples in this document, we will use the `MyST Markdown
format <https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/formats.html#myst-markdown>`_.

If you are using alternative formats for Jupyter notebooks,
there are two main ways to include them
in your Sphinx documentation:

- Parsing the notebooks with `jupytext`_ and rendering them with `nbsphinx`_.
  It is especially convenient if you are already using nbsphinx,
  or if you want to use a notebook format
  different from both ``.ipynb`` and MyST Markdown.
- Using `MyST-NB`_. This is the simplest option
  if you don't need any of nbsphinx or jupytext functionalities.

.. _MyST: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/

.. note::

   In summary: both nbsphinx and MyST-NB
   can parse ``.ipynb`` notebooks and include them in Sphinx documentation.
   In addition, MyST-NB can read MyST Markdown notebooks,

>    and nbsphinx can read any alternative formats understood by jupytext.

Reviewer 3: And here, a lot of fixation on the alternative formats lol

Luckily, there are a few extensions to also allow Jupyter notebooks as source files.

.. _ipynb-notebooks-sphinx:

Including classic ``.ipynb`` notebooks in Sphinx documentation
--------------------------------------------------------------

First of all, create a Jupyter notebook using the editor of your liking (for example, JupyterLab_).
For example, ``source/notebooks/Example 1.ipynb``:

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/example-notebook.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Example Jupyter notebook created on JupyterLab

   Example Jupyter notebook created on JupyterLab

.. _JupyterLab: https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/

Next, you will need to enable one of the extensions. For example, in the case of nbsphinx:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: nbsphinx

      .. code-block:: python
         :caption: conf.py

         extensions = [
             "nbsphinx",
         ]

   .. tab:: MyST-NB

      .. code-block:: python
         :caption: conf.py

         extensions = [
             "myst_nb",
         ]

Both extensions will register themselves as processors for ``.ipynb`` notebooks,
so you don't need to change the

> `source_suffix <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-source_suffix>`_

Author: Removed the paragraph, see below.

> configuration yourself.

Author: You're right, it's too technical. Will remove it.

Finally, you can include the notebook in any *toctree*.
For example, add this to your root document:

.. code-block:: rest

   .. toctree::
      :maxdepth: 2
      :caption: Contents:

      notebooks/Example 1

The notebook will render as any other HTML page in your documentation
after doing ``make html``.

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/example-notebook-rendered.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

>    Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

Author: `numfig = True` was introduced in our configuration here https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/commit/caf990bc31affb8179fecc0edb8aa2adf75a9abc I don't think we can disable it selectively.

>    Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

Reviewer 4: I see. We can either:

- disable it and re-work the section of `numref` from that guide to not use it live
- modify https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-numfig_format to empty string `''` and hope to not show anything

>    Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

Author: I'll do the latter for now, let's revisit this later

>    Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

Author: Nop, it doesn't work:

```
Exception occurred:
  File "/home/juanlu/Projects/RTD/readthedocs.org/.venv/lib/python3.6/site-packages/sphinx/writers/html5.py", line 292, in append_fignumber
    self.body.append(prefix % '.'.join(map(str, numbers)) + ' ')
TypeError: not all arguments converted during string formatting
```

I'll have to do the former.

>    Example Jupyter notebook rendered on HTML by nbsphinx

Author: Done!

  You need to click it before exporting your notebook to HTML.
- JupyterLab provides a "Save Widget State Automatically" option in the "Settings" menu.
  You need to leave it checked so that widget state is automatically saved.
- In Visual Studio Code `it's not possible to save the widget
  state <https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-jupyter/issues/4404>`_
  at the time of writing (June 2021).

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/jupyterlab-save-widget-state.png
   :width: 30%
   :align: center
   :alt: JupyterLab option to save the interactive widget state automatically

   JupyterLab option to save the interactive widget state automatically

For example, if you create a notebook with a simple
:ref:`ipywidgets:/examples/widget list.ipynb#intslider`
widget from ipywidgets and save the widget state,
the slider will render correctly in Sphinx.

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/widget-html.gif
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Interactive widget rendered in HTML by Sphinx

   Interactive widget rendered in HTML by Sphinx

To see more elaborate examples:

- `ipyleaflet`_ provides several widgets for interactive maps,
  and renders live versions of them `in their

>   documentation <https://ipyleaflet.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/velocity.html>`_.

Reviewer 4: Is there any reason to not use intersphinx on this link?

Author: https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/pull/8283#discussion_r662533886

Author: Done!

> - `PyVista <https://docs.pyvista.org/>`_ is used for scientific 3D visualization

Reviewer 4: pyvista seems to be a Sphinx project as well. We could use intersphinx on it too.

Author: Yes, my policy was to avoid adding intersphinx links to the examples, and keep them for the "core" explanations of the guide. That way we avoid overloading our intersphinx mapping with too many sites. But perhaps it's a silly premature optimization. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: Oh, I see.

I was thinking about using intersphinx whenever is possible. In particular because of these two reasons:

- it promotes the usage of intersphinx + hoverxref
- it's useful for the reader

Author: Done!

      'sphinx_gallery.load_style',
   ]

After doing that, there are two ways to create the gallery:

- From a reStructuredText source file, using the ``.. nbgallery::`` directive,
  :ref:`as showcased in the
  documentation <nbsphinx:/a-normal-rst-file.rst#thumbnail-galleries>`.
- From a Jupyter notebook, adding a ``"nbsphinx-gallery"`` tag to the metadata of a cell.
  Each editor has a different way of modifying the cell metadata (see figure below).

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/jupyterlab-metadata.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Panel to modify cell metadata in JupyterLab

   Panel to modify cell metadata in JupyterLab

For example, this reST markup would create a thumbnail gallery
with generic images as thumbnails,
thanks to the Sphinx-Gallery default style:

.. code-block:: rest

   Thumbnails gallery
   ==================

   .. nbgallery::
      notebooks/Example 1
      notebooks/Example 2

.. figure:: /_static/images/guides/thumbnail-gallery.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Simple thumbnail gallery created using nbsphinx

   Simple thumbnail gallery created using nbsphinx

To see some examples of notebook galleries in the wild:

> - `poliastro <https://docs.poliastro.space/>`_ offers tools for interactive Astrodynamics in Python,

Reviewer 4: It seems that there some bullets missing from this list. I was expecting to see more examples but there is just one project listed here. I think we should add more bullets or remove the listing and left only one example.

Author: Done!

  and features `several examples and how-to guides using

>   notebooks <https://docs.poliastro.space/en/stable/gallery.html>`_

Reviewer 4: Why not using intersphinx here as well?

Author: https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/pull/8283#discussion_r662533886

Author: Done!

  and displays them in an appealing thumbnail gallery.
  In addition, `poliastro uses unpaired MyST
  Notebooks <https://github.com/poliastro/poliastro/tree/0.15.x/docs/source/examples>`_
  to reduce repository size and improve integration with git.

Background
----------

.. _nb-background:

Existing relevant extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are two main extensions that add support Jupyter notebooks as source files in Sphinx:
nbsphinx_ and MyST-NB_. They have similar intent and basic functionality:
both can read notebooks in ``.ipynb`` and additional formats supported by `jupytext`_,

> and are configured in a similar way.

Reviewer 4: I think we already talked about them at the beginning of the document, does it make sense to rephrase this saying something like: "as we have seen, there two main extensions... let's jump into their differences" or similar?

I'm not sure if we presented the extensions previously but only mentioned that there are two ways of doing the guide. It may make sense to make this presentation earlier in the doc and here just refer to that?

Author: Yes, I will rephrase the beginning and this part so it makes more sense. Otherwise, this introduction comes "too late"

However, there are some differences between them:

- nsphinx uses `pandoc <https://pandoc.org/>`_
  to convert the Markdown from Jupyter notebooks to reStructuredText
  and then to `docutils AST <https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/doctree.html>`_,
  whereas MyST-NB uses `MyST-Parser`_
  to directly convert the Markdown text to docutils AST.
  Therefore, nbsphinx assumes `pandoc flavored Markdown <https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#pandocs-markdown>`_,
  whereas MyST-NB uses `MyST flavored Markdown <https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/syntax.html>`_.
  Both Markdown flavors are mostly equal,
  but they have some differences.
- nbsphinx executes each notebook during the parsing phase,
  whereas MyST-NB can execute all notebooks up front
  and cache them with `jupyter-cache <https://jupyter-cache.readthedocs.io/>`_.

>   This can result in shorter build times when when notebooks are modified

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  This can result in shorter build times when notebooks are modified
```

  if using MyST-NB.
- nbsphinx provides functionality to create thumbnail galleries,
  whereas MyST-NB does not have such functionality at the moment
  (see :ref:`notebook-galleries` for more information about galleries).
- MyST-NB allows embedding Python objects coming from the notebook in the documentation
  (read :ref:`their "glue" documentation <myst-nb:glue>`
  for more information)
  and provides more sophisticated :ref:`error reporting <myst-nb:start/error-reporting>`
  than the one nbsphinx has.
- The visual appearance of code cells and their outputs is slightly different:
  nbsphinx renders the cell numbers by default,
  whereas MyST-NB doesn't.

.. _nbsphinx: https://nbsphinx.readthedocs.io/
.. _MyST-NB: https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/
.. _MyST-Parser: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/
.. _jupytext: https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/

> Using which one to use depends on your use case. As general recommendations:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Deciding which one to use depends on your use case. As general recommendations:
```

(I'm not sure what I'm doing 🐶 , but sounded weird "Using which on to use" to me)

- If you want to use :ref:`other notebook formats <other-formats>`
  or :ref:`generate a thumbnail gallery from your notebooks <notebook-galleries>`,
  nbsphinx is the right choice.
- If you want to leverage a more optimized execution workflow
  and a more streamlined parsing mechanism,
  as well as some of the unique MyST-NB functionalities
  (``glue``, better error reporting)
  you should use MyST-NB.

For the rest of this document we will focus on `nbsphinx`_,
and we will point out the differences with `MyST-NB`_ where appropriate.

> Notice that they can't both be used at the same time.

Reviewer 4: It seems we can delete this paragraph, the guide is about to finish and we already presented both options.

Author: Good catch!

  - Clear outputs before commit.
    Minimizes conflicts, but might defeat the purpose of notebooks themselves,
    since the computation results are not stored.
  - Use tools like `nbdime <https://nbdime.readthedocs.io/>`_ (open source)
    or `ReviewNB <https://www.reviewnb.com/>`_ (proprietary)
    to improve the review process.
  - Use a different collaboration workflow that doesn't involve notebooks.

- Replace ``.ipynb`` notebooks with :doc:`a text-based format <jupytext:formats>`.
  These formats behave better under version control
  and they can also be edited with normal text editors
  that do not support cell-based JSON notebooks.
  However, text-based formats do not store the outputs of the cells,
  and this might not be what you want.
- Pairing ``.ipynb`` notebooks with a text-based format,
  and putting the text-based file in version control,
  as suggested in the :doc:`jupytext documentation <jupytext:paired-notebooks>`.
  This solution has the best of both worlds.
  In some rare cases you might experience synchronization issues between both files.

These approaches are not mutually exclusive,
nor you have to use a single format for all your notebooks.

> For the examples in this document, we will use the :ref:`MyST Markdown
> format <jupytext:formats.md#myst-markdown>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For the examples in this document, we have used the :ref:`MyST Markdown
format <jupytext:formats.md#myst-markdown>`.
```
